All right, so in this lesson, we'll learn how to declare types for arrays.
Now, an array may seem like a data type, and indeed it is, but realize that it's actually an entire
category of data types.
For example, we can have an array of numbers, we can have an array of strings, we can have an array
of booleans, we can have an array of objects.
And when it comes to TypeScript, it likes to be pretty specific.
So the more that we can help it by telling it what kind of array we have, the better.
So, for example, if I simply declare a concert here called Foods and provide it with an empty array,
typescript using type inference can figure out that we have an array, but it has no clue what kind
of values we want to populate inside it.
So if I hover my mouse over foods to get the typed declaration, we're going to see.
It's going to think it's an any array.
It's basically an array that can store any type of value.
Right.
And you can see the syntax in the little highlighted box is going to be the type of any followed by
the square brackets, which basically indicates an array.
And that's going to be the syntax for declaring an array of a given type.
We write that type, for example, string or number followed by square brackets.
We're going to see that in a second.
This is just to show you that if we declare an array just by itself with nothing inside it, TypeScript
cannot make the best guess for what it's supposed to contain.
But take a look at what happens as soon as I provide a sample value.
For example, if I provide a string like Hello now TypeScript can figure out because you assigned me
an array with a string, I can assume that foods is going to be an array of strings so that if I hover
my mouse over this, you're going to see it's now going to update that from being an any array to a
string array.
Notice it has the word string followed by these square brackets, a string array.
Right.
And thus check out what's going to happen in the next line.
If I invoke the push method and I try to push in something like the word world, that's totally fine
because foods is going to be an array of strings.
That's totally fine.
However, if I tried to push something like a number value like five five is not a string.
And we told TypeScript, or rather TypeScript inferred that the food array was going to be an array
of only strings.
So now if I hover, my mouse over five will see it says argument of type number.
In other words, the value five that you gave as an argument to the push method is not assignable to
a parameter of type string.
So TypeScript inferred that because you have an array of strings and the push method appends a value
to the end of that array of strings, that parameter that you provide to push must also be a string
to conform to the standard that is inferred above.
And thus, if we have an array of strings, we can't simply add on a numeric value.
All right.
And hopefully this is starting to again give you more ideas of how TypeScript can quickly catch errors
in your code.
Right now, as far as manually declaring the type, you guessed it, it's simply going to be the exact
same syntax we've seen before.
After our variable name or a constant, we're going to put a colon followed by the type.
So if you want to be explicit here and we want a string array, remember we provide the data type.
It's going to be a string, not not a string by itself, but a string array.
So we need to provide the square brackets afterwards.
So neither string nor the square brackets by itself will work.
You literally need to provide string for byte followed by square brackets, and that kind of makes sense
logically.
Reading it from left to right, string array, right string followed by the brackets for right.
So again, this is just the type declaration.
This is just telling TypeScript what it is, right?
This is the actual value.
This is the concrete thing that we're creating the real array with the real value inside it.
This is just the type.
This is us describing to TypeScript what the data is, not the actual exact value that it has.
All right.
Otherwise the same rules apply.
I can, for example, push in anything else here and that will work.
And as you guessed it, the exact same rules apply for anything else.
So for example, if I want an array of numbers, I provide a colon than my type.
I want a number array.
And then here I can provide some initial values like four, eight, 15, 16, 23, 42 once again, if
we did not provide this type, typescript would still be able to infer that we have an array of numbers
based on the original assignment.
If we do not provide an assignment, TypeScript cannot guess what it is, and if we provide an assignment
of an array, TypeScript can guess that it's an array, but not what it's supposed to hold.
So it's going to fall back to an any array, an array that can hold any combination of different values
of different types.
All right.
So that's how you declare a type declaration for an array in TypeScript.